In this lesson, we'll look at what services you can include in your website, care and maintenance
packages, and how to best manage them.
You'll learn how to monitor and update multiple websites at once.
Learn some tools that can help you with proposals for new client sites and how to express the value
of your website care plans to new clients By the end of this video, you'll understand how to best manage
multiple websites on an ongoing basis, as well as what to do with domain registration and email hosting
alongside your website hosting and care services.
Let's talk about hosting and creating websites for clients and how to manage some of the needed items
that have to be done to take care of a WordPress site on an ongoing basis.
Of course, in the last lesson we talked about hosting, but there are other layers needed beyond just
hosting, like WordPress, plug in and theme updates, WordPress core software updates, monitoring
for uptime and backups, and things like that.
And there are tools that I use and recommend for managing multiple websites in the background.
Now, just right here on my screen is an example of this is my client management website, and we're
going to tour this in detail in the next couple of lessons.
But just looking at draft media here, I use a very simple website with WooCommerce installed and Woooo
subscriptions managed in the background.
So if I have in particular potentially, here's a sample website, project fee and ongoing website care
and maintenance product here on my website that I've created just as a sample.
And, you know, for my website care, I generally start at either $100 a month for website hosting
and website care and go up from there.
I like to give, you know, a discount for paying in advance for the entire year.
Generally, almost 100 percent of my clients pay annually instead of by the month, so a thousand dollars
a year and a $3500 project fee is a good example of kind of a minimum small project fee for me.
Where I live in the United States for creating a WordPress website for a client, for 3500 for the project
fee and an ongoing membership for website care maintenance at a thousand dollars per year.
And so let me just show you some of the tools that I use in order to provide the services needed for
that website care plan.
If you look here, there's a little bit of a description, you know, just very basic here in the description
I've I design a new site.
There's a website care plan that includes software updates and monitoring and also includes hosting
that website and then email communication.
The client can can email me at any time to ask questions to have me do simple changes or updates to
the website.
And if there are any issues, then they can communicate with me in that way.
And so for that, you know, some of the tools that I use, one of them is manage WP.
This is a free service and there is a paid level.
But the free service managed WP allows you to use a special connection plug in that you put on each
of your WordPress websites that allows you to log in and have a dashboard where you can update plugins
and themes and WordPress core software all at once.
Now I tend to update websites in an individual basis, especially for larger updates like theme updates
or WordPress core updates individually.
And oftentimes I use a staging area to manage the updates to make sure that everything is working well,
and I test everything on a staging area.
However, manage WP and there are some other services that provide this same type, but I use the free
managed WP service to monitor my websites and know which of them need updates.
They'll give me alerts for any kind of, you know, if there's any kind of a software updated need and
I can manage simple updates, multiple websites at once.
And so it makes it easy to look at all of your websites together on a website management dashboard.
You can automate your workflow as far as they do offer in some of their more advanced plans, security
and backups as a part of their paid plans.
Client care and white label reporting is something that you can add on with managed WP, and you can
also do that through, of course, the flywheel growth suite that we talked about earlier in this section.
But I just use the free version of managed WP to just.
Get an idea of the state of all of my client websites at once, and I can get alerted if there's any
kind of a security issue where I need to update some plug in immediately because there's been a security
breach of some kind or, you know, a hacking attempt or anything like that that we've seen in the WordPress
environment.
I get notifications of that.
And so that's one tool that I really recommend.
A second tools called uptime robot uptime monitoring is something that in case your site goes down,
the worst thing is for your client to notice that their site is down and then contact you.
And that's the first you're hearing about it.
It just doesn't feel very comfortable to have the client see that.
So rarely now do any of my sites go down.
But Uptime Robot is a good way to just assure that you hear about it within five minutes.
If any of your sites go down so you can get free 50 monitors with a check every five minutes with uptime
robot.
And so it's a great place to start.
And they do have paid plans for more sites.
But Uptime Robot is easy to set up.
You really just log in and put the name of your site up, and every five minutes they monitor the site
to make sure it looks right and nothing is wrong with it.
They also give you a percentage of time that your site has been up and shows you when it's gone down.
Historically, you know they've got the free plan.
The Pro plans check every one minute instead of five.
So that's an advantage, and it's just a great place to start because it gives you a real room for growth
as far as monitoring for uptime.
So let's look at some of the more advanced things that I like to include in my website care plans.
And as far as setting up for hosting for client sites and even getting client sites in and, you know,
setting up proposals and website care agreements, let's look at a company called Agency Mavericks.
Troy Dean and his company WP Elevation, rebranded in the last year call to agency Mavericks am a great
resource for me and also for you is the blog at agency Mavericks dot com and at agency Mavericks.
There's a great resource under media and blog.
I really recommend as you're starting out or if you're looking at improving your client proposals or,
you know, interviewing clients and with discovery interviews and setting up proposals to potential
new clients.
Just go ahead and just search the word proposals in the agency Mavericks blog, and you'll come upon
a real set of great resources about better proposals.
We've talked about this a little bit, you know, you talking about features of your website and your
business as benefits and how they benefit the client, how to win proposals.
There's a proposal tools blog post right here, but this blog ad agency Mavericks, they support WordPress
consultants and WordPress professionals and help them to improve their businesses and their workflow.
And so there's a lot of great information in this blog here, and it is a great place to start and to
continue to improve your business as far as getting great proposals out there and among other topics.
And then another resource I would recommend is the admin bar.
If you're not already, you should definitely join the Facebook group.
The community under the admin bar Kyle, who manages this community, is a great agency owner himself
and has developed this into one of the best Facebook groups and most engaged groups as far as helping
each other as WordPress professionals and freelancers and agency owners.
And so there's a couple of resources here at the admin bar that I would recommend that you look at and
even even buy.
There's some a couple of low cost products that I would really recommend, one of which has to do with
proposals.
So there's this easy peasy proposal product that that they have at the admin bar.
And you know, there's Kyle right there.
But this proposal template, it cost 19 U.S. dollars, but it is basically a fill in the blanks proposal
template for getting new clients.
And so it's got a lot of things that some things you may just eliminate to simplify your proposals,
but you can.
Have things like, you know, what are the objectives, the scope of the job, how communication will
happen?
What's the investment and a lot of different things that are easy to kind of gloss over when you're
starting out and it just gives you a great framework for getting great proposals out for potential new
clients in your business.
And so I really recommend the easy peasy proposal template.
Now, it's not a contract and monster contracts is what he recommends, and I think it's a great way
to go if you want to go with the formality of a contract.
But the proposal really, it gives the client more of a professional look and an idea of what will be
involved in the project.
Because as you talk to business owners, of course, you know, website design and going through a website
redesign or a project is not something that is in their profession oftentimes.
And so there are some things that are that are easy to gloss over and that they might not understand
going into it that really need to be a part of the project proposal, like scoping the timeframe that
it will take, how the communication will take place.
Avoiding things like scope creep, where you know, there's a certain proposal that's been signed off
on and then the client comes back and says, Oh, well, I want to add this to to the website.
And of course, I forgot that this thing is needed in our business and that can cause the the scope
of the project to creep upwards, which of course, is a cost to you as a business owner or the freelancer.
And so you want to avoid scope creep, and this can help you to do that.
And so the easy peasy proposal, first of all and then secondly, the website owner's manual.
This is something that has to do with explaining website care plans and what is what is involved in
running a website on an ongoing basis.
And so, you know, it might at the beginning, it might feel like $100 a month as a minimum or a thousand
dollars per year is a lot of money to run a website for a client.
But it really isn't, especially if you go through this website owner's manual.
And so to explain the website owner's manual, it came out at first because, you know, as an agency
owner or a freelancer, you know, you may feel resistance as far as the client feeling like, Well,
you know, you've charge me thousands of dollars to build this website.
It's already up and running.
Why do I have to pay this money to keep it going?
It's not a set and forget it process running a WordPress website or any WordPress or any website, for
that matter.
It costs money to run a website not only the hosting cost, but the managing software updates, managing
monitoring and backups, which are a really important part of managing a website.
And so the website owner's manual is a resource that you can use first while you're describing and explaining
a project from the very beginning.
But also, if you happen to have a client that wants to manage their own website moving forward instead
of paying for your website care plan, one thing you can do is you can say, OK, it's great that you
want to go in and manage your website.
We spend time on each and every one of our client sites, and these are the things that we do.
And you can pass on the website owner's manual to that business owner, which explains the different
items that are needed to maintain and manage their WordPress website.
And it's about a 50 page document that talks about everything that you would be doing if they paid your
fee for website care.
And, you know, 99 percent of the time, the result of that is that instead of the client taking on
the job of maintaining their own website, they would much prefer to have you do it for the fee that
you want to get for that.
And so, you know, there's important website details.
There is maintenance overview schedule.
There's a troubleshooting guide.
Now this is a great resource if the client truly wants to take on maintaining their website themselves,
and it is a great thing for you to be able to offer to them for free for in exchange for not maintaining
their website.
And so but the result oftentimes is that the client will turn around and say, You know what, my business
expertise is in running my business, and I don't want to either manage that all myself or have to hire
people to do it.
And so again, I highly recommend the website owner's manual as a tool, as a part of your freelance
business or your agency, and a way to sell more care plans, as the button indicates here.
And.
Support the pricing structure that you need to get for your website care plans.
And finally, let's just talk a little bit about website and domain registration and email hosting.
I know in the last section of the website we went into detail about email hosting and how it's a best
practice to separate that from the website hosting.
And now in my business, and what I'd recommend that you do if you're hosting client sites is that whenever
possible for both domain registration and email hosting that you take that on as a part of your website
care plan and you just take care of that as a part of your single monthly or annual fee for your clients.
In my business, I roll email hosting and I roll domain registration right into my website care plan.
And I don't just charge them a little bit more for each one of those for email hosting.
If I do have a business that requires a lot of email addresses or say, you know, more than, say,
three email addresses, or I often will just escalate them to the $300 a month plan instead of the $100
a month plan for me.
Word WordPress website, hosting and maintenance.
And I like to call that a website care plan, of course, as you've heard me refer to it.
But the reason for that is that for both managing email hosting and especially for domain registration,
domain registration is such a small cost that you know there can be just for forgetting to renew your
domain name on an annual or on a multiple year basis.
As far as registration registration for your domain name, the result of not renewing a domain name
is quite catastrophic.
The website goes down, and so that's not something that you want to leave your client responsible for.
It's better to take that responsibility off their plate and just take care of of that for them.
So oftentimes, if a client already has a domain registered in their name, I'll make the extra effort
to migrate that domain into my Cloudflare account and pay for that myself as a part of a business expense
instead of letting them keep that registration.
Now, if the client would prefer to keep the domain registered in their name, that is totally fine.
I just make sure and remind them, and I keep my mind on that that needs to be renewed or otherwise.
The website and the email will go down.
And so if oftentimes I'll take on a new client that already has a website.
We're doing a website redesign project.
And in that case, I'll talk to them about transferring the domain name into my business.
Yeah, so that they don't have to worry about managing it.
But if they prefer to have the domain name registered in their name instead, then that is fine with
me.
And so as far as email hosting again, I can, you know, at Rackspace, I pay about $3 per email address
per month.
And so if I have a client that's requiring, you know, a group of emails for multiple people within
within their their company, I do oftentimes either roll that into a website care plan that's on my
minimum cost or a little bit more.
The if I feel that the website care is going to take a little bit more of my time and I want to be more
hands on with that client as far as managing more email addresses and storing those and helping that
client as far as with blog posts or ongoing work, that might be more time on my part, then I escalate
them to the $300 a month website care plan instead of 100.
And so those are my two levels.
That's something that you have to decide for yourself.
You know what you want to charge for that, but that's just an example of how I really like to roll
everything into my own business and then charge a particular amount for that.
As far as in my business?
Next, a major part of managing client sites is, you know, doing software updates on plug ins, on
themes and on WordPress, as well as keeping the server nice and fast and scalable up and down, as
well as doing multiple backups so that you have an easily restore able backup in case anything were
to happen.
And so we'll go into detail next about the backups and updates and staging areas that I use in my business
and what I recommend for you.
Let's get into that next.